---

title: Towards a Marxist Understanding of Magic Realism
date: 2017-06-10
tags: ["Articles"]
---

***I'm writing this post mainly so that I can put down my initial thoughts for a talk I want to create titled "The Marxist Tendencies of Magic Realism". As such, I won't be delaying here on explaining some Marxist ideas in depth. I'd be happy to go into more depth in the comments though, so ask away if you care and don't fully understand something. Would appreciate that and any other feedback!***

Magic realism can be broadly defined as the description of a space (whether in literature, art, music or other media) in which most things are "real" (that is, normal, as we know them in our worlds) but other things are magical. Their magic is commonplace; it augments human actions and can lead to fantastical occurrences but doesn't fundamentally alter the imaginary space's reality. Another way to say this is that magic is mechanical/technical/scientific that is, that magic is governed by a set of defined rules which make it intelligible, develop-able, observable and approachable. This is in opposition to fantastical magic, which is governed by arcane sets of rules (such magic is often referred to as "the arcane arts" in literature) which are often unintelligible to all except for a select few (and, sometimes, unintelligible even to them, turning the "arcane elite" into mere vessels/channels of power), work in unpredictable ways and augment reality in dangerous and fundamentally "large" ways.

An interesting characteristic of magic realism, which was born in the 20th century, is the fact that a lot of it (I really want to say all of it because I can't think of an opposing example but I'm sure that's not true) seems to be left-leaning politically. In literature, it usually involves thinking in interesting, diverse and often radical ways about tradition, politics, power, the role of poverty, wisdom, folk histories, knowledge, and science. Take the excellent Kalpa Imperial by Angélica Gorodischer (translated by, who else, Ursula K. Le Guin) which is a collection of stories all revolving around the futile pretense of power to know the world and act in a rational ways. Kalpa, the eternal empire, falls again and again due to its ruler's hubris, a hubris grounded in the belief that they and their rule are eternal. Outside of literature, in the fruitful marriage of magic realism and diesel/steam punk evident in the Dishonored game franchise for instance or the popular RPG setting/system Blades in the Dark, realist magic presents both a risk and an opportunity for the proletariat, the skilled middle class and the criminal underworld of the setting. The technologies of magical realism are within everyone's reach, ancestry and money aside, and thus represent an opportunity to "level the playing field". More-so, roughly equated with the nascent coal and oil industries of the Victorian era, the production and actualization of the magical realist system rests on the labor, knowledge, and physical risk of those classes.

However, the technologies of magic also often wind up in the hands of the rich or require access granted by privilege and prestige. Thus, enabled by their unique qualities of supervision and control, magic realist systems also represent a danger as they enhance the exclusive powers of the ruling classes. This duality of means, the power and danger inherent in production technologies, is a classic Hegelian/Marxist thought. These magical technologies are over and over again represented as potential means for the liberation of the workers, if only those would grasp their content and wrench them from the ruling classes. Alas, as in Marx's analysis of Europe, these workers are addled by those selfsame classes, denied access to the technologies which they themselves help make possible. The workers have only their magical/holy/plasm infused chains to lose.

Magic realism then is often portrayed under the left-leaning thought of class consciousness, struggle and politics. Why is that the case? There is, after all, nothing inherently left-leaning about any of the media which produce magic realist works or nothing inherently left-leaning in speculative fiction (whose role in regards to magic realism is still hotly debated but nonetheless, obviously important). The answer then must lie in something about magic-realism, some quality or trait which makes it especially attuned, likely or attractive for left-leaning thought. One could, of course, resolve this question with a hand-wave and a geographical/chronological answer by pointing towards magic realism's genesis in Latin America. Having spawned from the literary intelligentsia of the early-mid 2000's, magic-realism is undoubtedly very much a creature of this cultural milieu. Thus, it should be no surprise to us (so the hand-wave goes) that it displays a tendency for left-leaning politics as that subsection of Latin society was steeped in the ideas, ideologies and expressions of that stream of thoughts. There are, of course, several issues with this kind of simplified solution.

First, it's incredibly coarse and fails to note nuances on all levels of its argumentation: Latin America, the intelligentsia, the 20th century literary movements, early magic realism and more are all complicated ideas housing complicated and diverse people (and, thus, opinions, politics and origins) which this argument simplifies into one "block" or "movement". Secondly, it fails to account for the apparent left-leaning tendencies of later waves of magic realism some of which have very little to do with Latin America. Thirdly, it's boring and reductive, nipping an interesting conversation in the bud via large scale explanations which fail to note gradients and differences within magic realism itself.

So, how can we begin to formulate a better answer for the seemingly bewildering presence of left-leaning politics in magic realism? I believe a good possible answer lies in Marxism. Itself a left-leaning political theory, it nonetheless did a very good job in examining how, why and where left-leaning ideologies (and other ideologies) spawn and take root. One of the chapters of Marx's theories that people tend to forget (in their fervor to either defend or denounce his economical ideas) is his shrewd analysis of the development of ideas and his Hegelian identification of different world perspectives with different social classes/mind sets/living conditions. As such, his theories are good grounds to start from when one asks: "why is one idea like this and not like that? Why and how do these two ideas go together and in what ways are they compatible or mutually beneficial with each other?"

So, what in Marxist theory can help us understand magic realism's left-leaning politics?