---
title: First Rain
date: 2020-07-13
---

This is a record of what I heard. First, I heard a soft ping from Tohil as the weather satellite completes its orbit and passes above High Camp. I'm not sure why it's the only satellite I have named so far; it has 27 brothers and sisters, circling HP3019. The irony of the fact that I've named the satellite before I've named the planet on which I've been residing for the past six months is not lost on me. However, as important as Tohil is to my life here on HP3019, naming the planet itself feels more *final* than naming a piece of metal floating around in orbit. If I'm being honest, and this is a journal that I think no one else will *ever* read so there's no reason *not* to be honest, I'm still not sure if I want to stay here. No one could blame me, I don't think; HP3019 has its charms but they're all buried under the rain. Perhaps "buried" is a bit too extreme. Obscured? Veiled? One of those adjectives.

Second, I heard the day's first report. Even now, when Tohil and its cohort tell me that the storm I have been suffering under for the past two weeks has abated, there is constant rain. There's just not a constant *deluge* of rain coupled with harrowing winds as I had experienced for the last 14 solars. To be honest, I still can't believe I made it out alive or that the camp is in one piece. High Camp fits its boring name to a tee; nestled between an outcrop of rock and the side of Peak 2918 (another place I hadn't gotten around to naming yet), I expected the camp to be sheltered from the worst of the storms. That was when I had just landed here, 14 solars ago, and the full impact of the lackluster "severe presence of hydration" that graced all reports about HP3019, as limited as they were, hadn't yet presented itself to me. By now, I was more learned. Severe was an understatement. But I don't blame whoever wrote that report: any other word would have been an understatement, regardless of how superlative and melodramatic it might seem.

Thirdly, I heard the wind's passage. I can still hear the howling of that bastard, frigid wind even now. Perhaps it is echoed in these less severe gusts that are still all around me. They are nothing like their parent; building up behind Peak 2918, the winds that came crashing down on me two weeks ago were one of those weather events that make you question your atheism. I'm sure many such events are sure to come. Tohil pings again, saying its "goodbye" as it continues on its orbit, away from direct comms with High Camp, as if to remind me that gods are all around me. Yes, yes, my dear satellite, I understand. I understand even better now, having survived my first proper storm on HP3019, how a human might come to need an explanation for the forces crashing around them when those forces are so...*palpable*. Everything on this planet, with its non-stopping water falling from the sky, makes a heaven seem as close as I've felt it, the arch of the sky somehow tighter, more present. Perhaps when something is constantly falling from it, be it a watery something or otherwise, you are more often reminded of how small you are in relation to it.

Or something, I don't know. Fourth...I don't remember what I heard fourth. The homegrown alcohol I've been making up here in combination with the high altitude is making me ramble, the order of my School-taught grounding exercises falling away from me. Like so much rain from the sky. Hah! even though no one is going to read this thing, maybe I should stir away from such cliché? I'm not even sure why I'm writing this journal. Don't get me wrong, I fully expect to publish it. I'm not going to die on this planet. This isn't one of *those* outposts. No, I just think no one will be interested in it. I've been in orbit for six months, alongside 28 cutting edge, state of the art satellites, and then 14 solars on the surface itself, and I've found absolutely nothing beyond endless lochs, valleys, mountains, seas, and more mountains. Sure, it's all very pretty; flora on HP3019 has adapted to the constant rainfall, undulating outwards in rhizomatic structures which cover entire mountain ranges in thick, rich grass. Hell, if you leave anything out for an hour or so in the rain, you'll probably come back to find it covered in growth. *Verdant* is the word I'm looking for. Maybe even *fecund*, though the rain makes this place much cleaner and more coldly septic than that word might suggest. There are no swamps here that I can see; only waterfalls, and rivers, and scree, and mountainside, and cloud cover, and wind, so much wind and rain and

Right. The alcohol is definitely kicking in (I made it from the fruit of a tree that grows in the area of High Camp; it's an acquired taste to say the least). Back to the centering exercises. The fifth thing I heard was this recorder telling me that its current memory card is running out. So, let me complete my duties before I am left alone with the night. Maybe a more sterile style of writing will help me stay on course here. Flora: plentiful. Fauna: none so far (and what a disappointment that is). Minerals: negligible deposits of iron and copper in some of the mountain ranges. Exotic materials: none. *Extractable* material: even less. What would a more serious mission to this planet even *do*? This is the real question I've been avoiding all along. If there's no follow up to this outpost, if all that will remain of Heart's sojourn on HP3019 is this measly journal and nothing more, then why am I even doing this? To be better understand rain? To become intimately familiar with wind? To learn what is sounds like when a million-million drops of water fall on the side of a mountain just like so? Truth be told, no one reading this journal is the *best* outcome for me. If they do, if some Cardiac Archivist in their blood-red robes reads this account, I think I'll find the next assignment even less palatable.

The sixth thing I heard...was the rain. Again. I think the main thing I wasn't ready for when I came here, even when I was up there in orbit, was how much the sound of rain would be invasive. No, that's not the word again. Beguiling? Charming? Hypnotizing? Something like that. Maybe *that's* what's to be gained on HP3019, why they might one day upgrade me from Capillary to Vein and maybe send me some more resources: a state of mind. For all my complaining, I *like* it here, I now realize. The pitter-patter of the drops, the song of the wind, the grumbling bass of the mountain-side as it takes it all in stride, granite skin like the universe's toughest to play drum (and yet the rain plays), it all makes me....buzz? No, too alcohol related and I'm not writing this because of the drink. In flight? Hovering? Static? Fuzzy? Something of the sort. Let me check the records quickly...just as I thought; I need the School exercises less and less. Hell, I haven't brewed anything in *pulses* and yet here I am with an improvised still on a foreign planet! Writing about hydraulic music and mountains being played as drums.

The seventh and last thing I heard was the recorder telling me through more and more insistent beeps that no, really, it's running out of space for my ramblings. OK, here we go: Capillary Thistle signing off. If anyone is listening or reading this, I like it here, on HP3019. I think I'll call it Water's Drum.