---

title: Listen, an Ongoing Series
date: 2018-07-07

---

**4.27.2018**

**Listen.** A few weeks ago, it was the anniversary of me changing my career path. A year since I started learning a whole new trade and to dabble in several others. I've learnt a lot of stuff but perhaps the most important thing was not a new revelation but rather an affirmation of something I had felt for a long time: knowledge, like many things in nature, is as poisonous as it is healthy. Think of silver or garlic or certain chemicals; the touch of Eir is within these things but too much of them can overload you and reverse the scales. In the case of knowledge, it's more of a case of Paean than Eir. Knowledge heals the other faculties, just like Paean heals the other gods. It fortifies your resolve, your courage, your intellect, your self-assurance. Too much of it does not reverse the scales but it does become poisonous, supercharging those traits. In short, knowledge easily makes you too much to handle, both in an inwards sense and to your surroundings.

**Listen.** Whenever I leave places, even if I've stayed in them for only a few hours, it hurts. It's part of how my emotions have always been amplified; I feel strongly and quickly. Naturally, the more time I spend in a place, the more it hurts but there too, the orders of magnitude are much too high. That is, the difference between an hour and a day are closer to what you might expect between a day and a year. It's the kind of pain that feels like an absence; a routine has died. A familiar place has died. A way of being has died. A template of spending this ever shifting attempt at tight rope walking that is called life has died. This is exacerbated by the fact that I don't believe in return but long for it, always. Thus, when I physically go back somewhere, it hurts even more; now there are two absences, overlaid pictures, one slightly less fading than the other but both of them bound to one day meld in their yellowed out frailty.

**Listen.** Staying alive is being suspended. All situations are transitional, especially inward ones; our selves are not some static cores of god-given light, rationality beaming from out of our eyes like lighthouses. We are lighthouses in reverse, not calling to ships in their stability but going towards a harbor in the fog in our instability, returning to where we originally meant to stand but never reaching that place, using light to reach a hollowness in the shape of us that doesn't really exist other than in the memories of our foundations, the lowest places in us remembering musky dirt, remembering reaching downwards and, with the concrete of our assumptions, grounding themselves into a place that felt like forever. But the place that feels like forever doesn't exist. All that exists is the yearning, the intention, the stretching of the neck, the impossible suspension between where you were and where you'll be, a suspension which creates what we call now.

I don't know what to do with any of this but I know that coming to terms with the poison of knowledge, with the pain of leaving, with the suspension of life, is the only way I can keep living. So that's what I'll try and do. I don't know if this is for you or good for you. I don't even know if this is for me or good for me. But it's what I have, it's the flimsy embankment on which I rebuilt my life after it fell apart. That is, my relationship with these ideas and feelings, not the ideas and feelings themselves, are the embankment. My position towards them is the foundation; a shift of the shoulder, a setting of the chest forward, a reaching of the neck, an intention towards.

I hope you're doing OK. I love you.

**4.28.2018**

**Listen.** You ain't never going back, OK? The bus that is you only unravels the weave in one direction and there is no knot quite the same. So you ain't going back; that moment you cherish? It's gone. With it is home gone, the mischievous wind on your cheek, the anger, the feeling of steel on rusted steel, a slight hint of laughter, it's gone. The only pain in this world is the pain of wanting to go back, of your mind insisting on a U turn when the road is unmarked, falling apart, scrubbed away. This is where religion comes from and literature and music and all else. So, we won't chuck away that pain, even if we could. Which we can't. But we wouldn't anyway because there's just too much baby in them waters and you know how the saying goes.

**Listen.** Being in the presence of pain is the most tautological way to describe being alive. It is the basic tension of existing, a proverbial crucifix on which we hang, pressures not just pulling us in either and all directions but in no direction, in an indescribable direction. This might sound like a bad thing and it is, in many ways. But what choice do I have? To grow lax is to die. And one day I will but not right now. Right now, the suspension is all and me in the midst of it, suspended and suspender both.

**Listen.** So many words have been said about all of these things that I feel pointless writing this. By virtue of logic alone, by the unconquerable power of statistics, it is likely that someone has already written or said the answer. It's also likely that I've read or heard it or both a million times. And yet, to cling to that answer (which even now probably nestles within the backwards reaches of my mind, like a wyrm wrapped around the best metaphor there ever was, Yggdrasil, the language tree) is to cling to return and, like I've already said, there ain't no going back. Cruise control is locked in; this rig don't break, not for anyone.

Thus, we converse on this, our road, you and I. Friends by virtue of the bus, of the inexorable direction in which our lives always hurtle in. Time's cruise control; eternity's flight path; the beginning's itinerary; the end's blueprint.

We're going home baby. It's going to be OK. I love you.

**7.7.2018**

**Listen.** There was a time when you didn't know how to tie your shoes. These days, I do it without even thinking about it, just pausing my daily routine and performing a dexterous task I once didn't know how to accomplish. Someone taught you how to do that, even though there were no books. They taught you through their skill and their attention. They spent their time on me, leaning in from above (I assume, I don't remember. My mind isn't good at remembering times when I was shorter than people) and showing you something that they took for granted. Do you understand how hard that is? If you don't, try teaching a kid how to tie their shoes. Try to break down a task which you never think about while performing into its disparate elements. Try taking those elements and putting them together in a way that another person will understand. Then you will realize how much people that love you, love you.

**Listen.** I don't know how to die and that's OK. I hope there will be a time when I will. I'm not sure who will teach me to do that; who will take apart the disparate elements of the most obvious action, living, which generates the least obvious object, life? Who loves me enough to put their hands on their own existence and slowing, ever slowing down, take apart the knots that tie their memories to their emotions, their emotions to their actions, their actions to their loved ones? Who will teach me to untie my life? I think it will be you. I think you will one day reach down (from a height of otherness that I can barely imagine) and put your hands around your own life and pull in the exact right angle and with just the amount of requisite force. Then, your life will splinter into shards and I'll look inside and you, with the calm gentle voice of a distant but loving friend, will show me how all of the parts fit. I believe this will happen although I'm sure it won't. I can't wait.

**Listen.** We learn, alright? We can't help it. I wish there was some way for us to stop. I wish there was some way to get off of this road surrounded by potsherds, surrounded by the dismantled actions, memories and intentions of everyone else that suffered through this thing called life but there isn't such a way. Listen, one day I'll learn how to die and you will too and we will all stop. And that will be a good day. I'm afraid. But that will be a good day. There will be a laying down of burdens that day and there will be an end that day and there will be a road a bit less dusty with the detritus of life. And we can make that day happen, you and I, because we are friends. We can reach in together into the laces of the lattice work called our relationship and we can help each other carry just a bit less. Will you let me show you how? Will you show me how? How to care a bit less, how to cry a bit more, how to feel a love that has no bounds in my heart, how to feel it as a warm fuzz behind my eyes whenever I see you, how to get lost inside your hug? Will you teach me how to lose myself in you and will you teach me how to find myself again? Will you teach me how to be a friend?

**Listen.** I don't yet know exactly how to go home but I know you'll show me the way one day. Take your time.I know that one day you will show me a silver path through a forest and I will smile and take it gladly. And that's why I love you. Because even though the day has not yet come for you to teach me, I know you'll one day do it. One day, you will show me the way out and I'll grab your hand and say "hey. thank you. I love you. Let's go".

And we'll go back home. Don't forget to tie your shoes. I'll do my own.

**7.15.2018**

**Listen**. There's a shall casing around our senses. Like all good armor, it imprisons us and protects both; in fact, serving that dualism is its inherent function. I walk around the world, like a bullet looking for a target, and my shell casing hugs me. There are motives and thoughts behind those voices which seep through the alloy of my casing but it robs them of momentum. Think about armor; what does armor do? How does it protect? It, first and foremost, absorbs momentum; it turns that which is volatile into that which is inert. There are as many types of armor as there are things sleeping in the world which is to say, there are infinite types of armor out there. But ours, mine, is of an especially subtle type. You can't see it, it's all powerful and I don't even notice that I'm wearing it. But nevertheless, its effects, once it meets something volatile, are instantaneous; all it needs is the touch of a voice, a hint of emotion, a smattering of volition and in an instant it springs into action and smothers that trajectory with stereotypes and presuppositions and established fact and entire narratives we've built for ourselves and about ourselves and, most importantly, about the constantly exploding ordinance that's traversing the world out there called other people.

**Listen**. There's one more universal trait of armor we haven't covered here: all armor contains within itself the means with which it can be stripped away. All suits are made with a misericorde in mind, a thin shaft of substance that slips between the plates, all nouns and conceptions and ontology, newfangled into sheets of protection, and takes them apart. That thin slice of compassion, of love, of thought, of unbridled, physical joy, of physical activity, of alcohol, of sweetness from far away, of companionship, of any number of things which are hot, hotter than the hottest exploding shell of embodied humanity, hotter than the hottest derision which I drilled into myself, that thin slice of mega-hot empathy strikes right into the core. And it wounds you. We've forgotten, in our day and age, why wounds are dangerous; they're not dangerous because of pain and rarely because of the wound itself, something so terrible that it severs critical systems and leaves us to die. No, wounds are dangerous because they make us susceptible. They strip away our defenses and open us up to the world, putting the outside in, taking the inside out, painting a huge target on our bodies that tells the infinite infinities of bacteria "Here's the feast; help yourself". This wound is no different; it lays me bare. It leaves me frazzled, like an electrical wire snipped by a kind hand, un-spooled by a gentle touch, now flapping in the wind for the steel beaks of others to nip at. And I feel every bite, every twitch of their necks like a faint burning, a strip of fire lashed across my skin.

**Listen**. Remember that the equation which draws a straight line between "pain" and "bad" is purely in your head; this pain is much more than something which can be classified as "bad". It is beyond ontology, beyond definition, beyond a dictionary even though a dictionary constantly mutters in our minds, yet it's intimately knowable, completely allergic to mystery, lies just at the edge of your grasp, inside the casing, coating it from within, like so much cleaning spray on a sink, something which burns, something with irritates the pale marble of your core but, in irritating, cleans. Have you ever rubbed your skin thoroughly to get rid of dirt? Have you ever seen the pink skin which signals rebirth, have you ever washed it with hot water and felt that terrible, amazing, healing burn? Have you ever walked down a street and suddenly felt all the stories of everyone in the street, and in the balconies, and in the windows looking down at the city with their lights on, carefully and subtly mirroring those of the planes in the sky, of the stars in the heaven, have you ever felt them in the eyes of those around you? Have you ever looked into the eyes of a stranger and felt a jolt and missed a step, your version of their story bulging behind your eyes but suddenly silenced by empathy? Have you ever walked down a boulevard and were suddenly struck by a multitude of pillars of fire, all human, all around you, all you, burning away the borders, burning away the shell casings, burning away the intricate armor which they and you have donned? Have you felt the potential of their stories screaming at you, their vocal reverberations stripping you of strength, until you almost fell to one knee, not knowing if you were hurting or elated or healing or hurting or if it was just the alcohol?

Friend, have you ever felt the flame that is recognizing an other? Have you ever suddenly had your perspective zoom out and saw all the points of fire surrounding you and knew them for yourself? Whether you have or not, something you said, something you did, a posture you took, a wisdom you gave, a gesture you made, led someone else to that place. That cliff side above and beneath and inside where no one with armor can come, where we must stand alone and shivering in front of a flame, cold for the heat, alone for the company, hurting for the cure, surrounded and yet singular. Even if you've never been yourself you have brought someone there.

And for that, I will always love you.

**12.7.2018**

**Listen**. The wind weighs heavily on my mind. It's as if a new message has been encoded on it. Once, it only spoke of places far away, to me at least, of places that perhaps never existed or never will. Now, it's as if it tells me that this place, by which it means the entire world and my bodily existence, once existed but now has ceased to do so. It whispers to me, carrying on its breath adverbs, adjectives, and advances, of how fast the yet-to-be is coming, of how quickly the past sloughs away from the bones of the earth, of how lightly a city filled with lights now hovers on the horizon, teetering over an edge so large, so encompassing, that the city can't yet perceive it. It dances as it does so, the wind. It bounces between trees, spinning in their midst, running its hands through the leaves, all the while babbling ceaselessly about diminishing returns, plummeting prospects, bottomless wells, and a path which leads to them.

**Listen**. On a hill, in the city filled with a million lights, in the city which hovers over the horizon, teetering, there are insects chirping in a building. They crawl over the discarded, hollowed out, greying pieces of wood left to them; their hive-voices bounce around the soft spaces left to them by us, reflecting and refracting into a thousand chitinous choirs, softly filling those spaces. In the silken light of lamps carefully placed to emphasize that which needs emphasizing, the bugs clutter and break apart again, fastening into balls, lines, convoys, group, and colonies. Their multitude of legs, like tiny hooks which propel them forward with infinitesimal little pulls, as if they are hooked on the very fabric of existence, churn, yearning for the other side of their box, for the other side of the glass, for the other side.

**Listen**. It's done but it's not done *yet*. There are still hundreds of heavy steps to take in the street, plodding along towards light. There are still a thousand content sighs to utter, sheltered in warmth. There are still a million gestures to make, while beautiful words spill from our mouths and move our hearts. There are still a billion little ways to move our face, our hands, our legs, our blood, our hair, there is still an infinity of moments in which to fall in love, to cry out in pain, to cry deeply from love, to have our breath snatched away, to have our ears sing with the sounds which bombard it. It's done but it's not done *yet*and until it's done, I'd like to spend my time with you. There are still hundreds of doorways filled with soft light, still a thousand windows spilling over with memories, still a million broken rays of light, still an infinity of memories to make. And when the time comes for what is already done to be done, we'll hold each other tight.

Hey. I love you. We're all going to die. It's going to be alright.

**12.20.2018**

**Listen**. Mythology is what comes out when you're searching for the words but end up giving up, the meaning you were looking for stuck somewhere in cerebral channels. Instead of the straight paths you unconsciously imagined, flowing from signifier to signified, by way of your ancestry and the impossible weight of language, you end up with a stunted, laborious and, ultimately, futile passage. You'll be trying to say "love" or "future" or "help me" and instead there will be a few hands waved in the air, an "um" and an "uh" and the words will escape you, quite literally, flying off to wherever it is that words fly off to. Your compatriot, your champion in conversation, the scope and the focus of your words, will be standing there, quite awkwardly, but not saying too much because, at that moment, they decided to exercise love. And you'll be struggling, clutching for those words, clucking as they fly (like chickens can't) far away from the coop of your intent and into the wide fields of nowhere.

**Listen**. That's where mythology comes in. Instead of those words, now far away and receding ever faster, you'll tell a story. Every time you stumble on a word you lost, you'll find other words, learning like a mouse bumping up against the walls of a cheese-smell filled maze, where your lingual path will take you. At first, it won't be too far away from what you first meant to say; the colors might change, the actors might too (filling in the blanks left by names and faces which, as we've already said, have sprouted wings and are translating far away from you) but the essence of what you wanted to say would, initially, stay the same. And then you'll want to say it, you'll have moved from what were petal words to the cardinal, juicy stem and try and utter the crux of your message. But those words too, will quickly be forgotten, as quickly as you'll conjure them, in fact. Remember the mouse? Think of its whiskers, those early warning alarm system, as they brush against the wall. Before the mass of dry cardboard, smelling less of cheese and more of stale lab, smashes against your nose, there will be trepidation.

**Listen**. Course correction. Like the mouse, you'll veer in a different direction from those odd-feeling voids left in the wake of your aviary words and the mythology will grow deeper. Now, original intentions have been left way behind and only the deepest forms of your message remain, buried under layers and layers of words you never intended to say, like rotting bones under the weight of all the sand in the world, piling on top of each other in crystalline structure of impenetrable semantics. But, meaning finds a way. Much like water seeping through blast shields of granite, finding their way between infinitesimal cracks to drip from ceilings enriched by the sediments within them, meaning will come but in reverse. It will wind its way from the submerged founts that were fed from the feathers of your flying word-birds, filled to the brim with a dry substance that, nonetheless, holds many colors. It will seep, this substance, like water up from the aquifers of your intents, up from the stymied torrents of your frustrated meanings, filtered by mythology. And if you thought that granite was hard, wait until the glimmerings of your context squeeze between the crevasses of myth, as it has for generations, on its way to the ears of your loving listener.

**Listen**. Despite all of this, it will be alright. The "um"s and the "uh"s will be replaced with words: metaphors, cliches, similes, synecdoches, expressions, twists of the tongue, turns of phrase. The voids will be gone and instead there will be teeth, sown, and soldiers, sprouting, and hills, sylvan crowned, and bulls, alabaster, and dreams, gossamer, and harps, singing, and snakes, hissing, and a face behind a door which doesn't open, a face which stares behind the wood at everything we do, a face which waits for us to open the door, which one day will open, a face which waits for you to finish what you're saying, no matter how long it takes.

**Listen**. I'm listening.
